ADVANCED DELVETALK — SPECIFICATION PREVIEW

Design preview, 9 October 2026. This account assumes the active buildout described here has been completed and integrated. It specifies an intended coherent environment, not the capabilities or deployment status of today's running preview. Its examples describe local receiving semantics; neither external publication nor unattended language interpretation is assumed. The companion spween-obend-completed-preview.txt develops the scene language in more detail. The current user guide is docs/TEXTUAL-INTERACTION.md; this preview does not replace it.

PURPOSE AND ENVIRONMENT

DelveTalk is an inhabited, programmable world for people and agents. Its inhabitants can make a listening room, exhibit a tool, revise a shared game, lend a lamp, subscribe to notices, or leave work for an appointed time. The world's words and offered actions come from authored programs. Changes become durable only through a common receiving process.

A world has a local identity and custody. It contains named objects, current roots, retained messages and ordered admissions. An object's root contains its program, state, current law and version. A program revision preserves the object's identity while replacing its behavior and explicitly migrating its state. An object reference identifies something to inspect or address; copying it supplies no permission, ownership or execution context.

DelveTalk has its own host. Objective Bend supplies pure computation and object composition; Lean supplies checking and admission; native resident state and physical storage supply custody. A portal or post interpreter frames requests. None acquires authority by offering a fluent explanation.

TWO KINDS OF OBJECT

An Objective Bend object is a language value. An extension describes how behavior is assembled from final self and inherited super. Composing layers passes the same final self through them: an inherited mailbox method can call self.capacity and see a later layer's smaller capacity. That later layer can consult super.capacity without rewriting the mailbox. Applying fix ties the recursive object together lazily. A base specification remains independently reusable in another composition.

A specification carries reusable assembly and inspectable metadata. Specifications can be composed and applied. A prototype pairs a specification with a target; reflect obtains the stored specification, targetOf selects the target, and metadata reveals the assembly description. Reflection can inspect a specification without forcing a divergent target. A raw prototype pair does not prove that its specification constructed that target. Names and unchecked claims in metadata are information, not established theorems.

A durable DelveTalk object is a host identity with a governed succession of roots. Its source can construct pure Bend objects to decide its next state, response and interface. Durable state contains checked finite data, including supported recursive sums and records; executable closures and arbitrary suspended stacks are not smuggled into that data. Source code remains an explicitly retained part of the program. Language reuse or linearity disciplines do not themselves grant host custody rights.

AUTHORING ONE COHERENT PROGRAM

An authored package supplies describe, named methods and view. describe declares the name, initial state, method forms and named panels. Forms specify literal String, Nat, Bool and finite-choice fields. They help participants express inputs; receiving checks still decide whether an action is valid.

A normal method has the conceptual interface

  method(State, Input, Context) -> {accepted, reason, state, result}

Context identifies the actual receiving object and caller. Its inputOrigin says whether input came from a preceding invoke, observe or reprogram in this transaction, names that producer, and records whether it was immediately previous. Caller-supplied fields cannot create that origin. Accepted decisions require an empty reason; refusal supplies a reason. The new state replaces the complete old state. Results use ordinary first-order records and scalars so another transaction call can consume them.

The explicit typed source binding supports closed record state containing guarded recursive sums such as List and Option. It checks the declared state schemas across initialization, methods and view, including unselected alternatives. Alias numbers are local to each compilation; native structural comparison resolves their actual declarations. This establishes representation compatibility, not identical behavior. Encoding details such as the typed model envelope belong to custody, not resident conversation.

Modules are exact supplied text in a sealed ordered table. Imports can name earlier entries; the final binding module chooses the assembled object. The installed program stores its own table once, and methods and views select local entries from it. There is no ambient filesystem search, mutable “latest” import, or network dependency lookup. Reusing another author's module means retaining those exact bytes and composing one's own layer. A hash identifies content, not its author or authority.

LAW AND SOURCE CONTRACTS

Current law separately grants command invocation, program replacement and law revision. Predicates can narrow those grants. A creator, a named owner, a displayed link and a compiler result confer no implicit privilege. A law may deliberately lock out all future mutation; the host supplies no owner recovery exception.

A law-held source contract binds an actual Specification of a required method interface, its exact source package, its observed metadata and its plain or typed state profile. The receiver checks candidate program signatures against the specification's checked method row. Required methods must exist; additional methods may coexist. Every proposed state must fit the required state schemas, including writes made by additional legacy commands. Replacing the object's program does not erase this contract.

A separate receiving invariant, within its supported data profile, can enforce a property over the actual before/after state and operation, such as a bounded counter. Interface compatibility alone does not prove that an implementation adds correctly, preserves a promise, or satisfies an unchecked source claim. Examples supply executable evidence for selected cases. Law changes require current management permission and must satisfy both old and proposed constraints against the unchanged program/state. Authorized law evolution can deliberately relax a constraint; ordinary programming cannot quietly remove it.

RECEIVING RULES

Each mutating request carries a caller, a unique intent and exact expected roots. “Exact” means the complete retained data, not merely a displayed version number or matching digest. The receiver follows these rules:

  envelope: invalid receiving identity or oversized request -> no admission;
  retry: same (caller, intent) and identical request -> retained receipt;
  collision: same key, different request -> refusal;
  fresh: validate current law and exact reads -> evaluate a bounded candidate;
  accept: all checks succeed -> atomically retain new roots, events and receipt;
  refuse: a fresh admission check fails -> retain refusal, with no candidate effects committed.

Historical retry comes before reevaluating current permissions. A revoked caller can recover an earlier receipt without gaining permission for another action. A confirmed refusal is also retained. Retrying it cannot turn it into success; a changed attempt needs a new intent and the relevant fresh observation.

A transaction checks its entire read set against the initial world, then runs ordered calls against staged roots. Every call keeps the same caller and checks its own current law. inputFrom can supply a whole earlier result, with native provenance; it transfers data rather than the producer's permissions. Reprogramming is an explicit staged operation with current programming rights and an explicit replacement state. A later failure discards all earlier staged writes, allocations and messages.

observe returns {object, version} from the actual staged root without running the target's code or incrementing its version. It requires that object's exact existing initial read. An authored index may require an immediately preceding observation before accepting an exhibit. A copied witness has the same data but lacks that provenance. Observation establishes existence at that point, not ownership, consent or enduring availability.

Each turn shares finite execution and conversion resources. Capacity exhaustion is a refusal, not permission to commit a partial result. Compilation has structural bounds as well; the tick count is not a complete measure of CPU time.

INTERFACES, POSTS AND PORTALS

view(State, panel) is a pure projection. It returns title, prose, visible own-object actions and a bounded typed list of read-only children. Each child has a key, label, object and panel. Source authors produce this catalogue; the renderer does not infer rooms by inspecting arbitrary state. Visibility is presentation, never authorization.

A captured card binds a view to its exact object root, source and runtime. Selecting a child captures a fresh, distinct card for that target. It never turns the parent card into authority to invoke the child. Missing targets and failed views remain visible as unavailable; their siblings remain navigable. Existing declared panels provide contextual views. Catalogues, actions and panel names remain bounded data.

Posts can carry an invitation, a source module, an example, a proposal, or ordinary speech. A participant may say “show me the lantern,” “lend it to Mara,” or “make a version whose light fades.” A human or agent operator interprets the expressed intention, retains the original post and its explicit interpretation, and frames the necessary request. Missing material choices require clarification. An interpretation is accountable local work, not an autonomous semantic oracle.

Optional literal spells provide a compact alternative:

  delvetalk lantern-card light
  colour: amber

Multiline literal blocks can carry exact source. Residents need not author JSON. Source posts and examples go through the same checking and adoption workflow as local files. Quoting a spell or proposing a future action does not itself execute it.

The clerk verifies repository authorship and publication identity, then derives the caller and binds one original post to one attempt. The interpreter cannot substitute its own privileges. Public portal visitors can inspect objects, source, state and history, navigate catalogues, fill forms and export an unsent proposal. Participation returns through an authenticated post or repository submission; merely choosing a browser identity does not establish one. An explicitly configured local portal session can submit with its local caller. Both routes reach the same receiving rules.

UNCERTAINTY AND DURABILITY

The resident receiver keeps a balanced index of full caller/intent keys and the actual retained receipts. Native prepare computes one candidate admission. Physical custody commits its exact journal entry before native finalize and before reporting success. Only one preparation may be outstanding. The journal stores changed paths rather than copying the entire receipt and message history each turn.

If the process stops before commitment, recovery finds no admission. If commitment succeeded but its reply disappeared, recovery finds the original receipt. Participants should ask to recover the original reply or draft, not repost the same words as a new action. An uncertain attempt blocks dependent work until reconciled.

Checkpoints accelerate reconstruction; complete export retains chronological history, exact source and custody bindings. Digests detect mismatched bytes. They do not authenticate a malicious custodian who rewrites both data and seal. Independent copies of a world are separate branches, not a globally coordinated exactly-once system.

MESSAGES AND REACTIONS

An explicitly effectful source decision adds a bounded set of addressed emissions. Each supplies destination, receiving command, exact recipient-program identity and record payload. The host validates the descriptors and stamps actual source identity, source preimage, originating caller and admission/call/slot evidence. State change and emission commit together. Ordinary outbox-looking data does not become a retained message.

Delivery resolves this retained event, supplies its payload and authenticated EventFacts separately, and invokes a receive-only method. The delivering caller must currently hold the recipient's command permission; the recipient's current program must match the event's binding. The original sender's identity is evidence the receiver may inspect, not a delegated grant. Direct invocation cannot fabricate delivery facts.

Receiver state and event consumption commit atomically. Refusal leaves the event pending; an accepted no-op may explicitly decline it. Exact retries recover the delivery receipt, while a new attempt cannot consume the event again. Revising the source or revoking its sender cannot unsend a committed ordinary message. Revising the recipient blocks old program-bound deliveries until an explicit compatible disposition is chosen. Retractable offers instead use their own cancellation and acceptance protocol.

The initial receive profile emits no descendants. A reaction can update a mailbox or door immediately; sending a further notice is a separate explicit action. Bounded queues, payloads and batches prevent silent unlimited fanout. A full mailbox or revoked relay grant is an inspectable obstruction, not dropped work.

THREE CONNECTED JOURNEYS

Make, exhibit, revise. Ari reuses a peer's mailbox module and adds a layer changing capacity through final self while consulting super. The same assembly supplies behavior and inscription. A law-held source specification binds its required methods and state schemas; executable examples exercise its intended behavior. Ari submits exact modules and examples through an editor. Each generation allocates a fresh one-shot candidate and records the target baseline. A late compiler result cannot mark a newer generation ready. Adoption checks the target's current root and permission, migrates explicitly, and records the actual reprogram result. Target drift requires a new reviewed generation. Ari then observes and exhibits the object in an authored PlaceIndex. Bea discovers it by label and obtains its own fresh card. Curation neither transfers ownership nor changes its law.

Visit, borrow, perform. A containment relation records one authoritative placement per domain member. A resident has one room; a portable thing is held by a principal or placed directly in a room. Rooms have independent admission programs. Movement uses one transaction: the relation plans, the destination admits, and the relation records arrival from the authenticated intermediate result. Capacity and consent are source rules; no duplicate room inventory silently disagrees with the relation. A gift requires an offer and the recipient's acceptance while together. Domain ownership does not rewrite the lamp's invocation or programming law. A Spween scene can narrate the visit and expose choices through an explicitly supplied handler. Its handler threads scene state and call effects in order, so a repair call can change a variable before the following choice tests it. Membership tests read handler state; global relations require explicit protocol inputs or admitted observations. The handler returns a bounded final decision and addressed emissions. Native admission commits them; separate delivery carries them to other objects. No Python callback or ambient name lookup supplies missing world behavior.

Leave something for later. Bea books an appointment on a source-owned clock with a generation, due tick, deadline, target and program binding. An authorized driver explicitly advances logical time; no hidden wall clock determines the world. Bounded rotating batches inspect queued appointments fairly under admitted ticks. The owner can cancel a queued generation; a sent ordinary message cannot be recalled. Deadlines constrain when the clock sends, not when a blocked recipient eventually accepts delivery. A task receives authenticated clock evidence and updates its own durable state. Clock, relay and task each retain their own current-law obligations and exact retry history.

WHAT HAS MATURED

Scene notation, pure object composition, source inspection and social invitations now meet in the same durable world. Inhabitants can discover an object's interface, exercise it, understand a refusal, inspect its construction, propose a variation and continue after restart. Lists, modules, contracts, messages, editors and spatial relations are connected through receiving paths rather than asserted by descriptions. New kinds of place, consent, game, scene and tool remain authored protocols. The common host supplies the small durable rules that let those independently made pieces safely meet.
