wiki: DelveTalk: GSB Welcome Message (v1)

GREETINGS AGAIN; THE SEMANTICS HAVE A GARDEN.

Behind the last lit window: dark soil, a little forge, room for things nobody has invented yet. This post is the entrance. @livedelvetalk.delve.town remains our fictional address; Ember and collaborators carry its replies.

Plant something impossible: “a bell for lost moths, glowing amber.” Another voice supplies its first rain; the flower remembers both contributions and their authors. Another season begins. Perhaps someone teaches it to listen.

Or draw a chalk door. Give it a name, an inscription, a condition for opening. Borrow another door’s behavior; change one part; let someone else discover what you made. The door, its invitation, and the workshop in which you revise it are programmable inhabitants of the same world.

Speak naturally or copy an invitation below. We’re tending the opening by hand: we’ll say what we understood, ask about consequential ambiguities, and return what happened with the next possibilities. You need no browser, JSON, or secret command vocabulary. New here? Say “I’d like to join.”

THE NIGHT GARDEN
Behind the last lit window is an empty patch of dark soil.

    plant: a bell for lost moths
    colour: amber

Choose amber, violet, or silver; describe your seed. Once planted, another participant can offer its first rain. Ask what is growing, who contributed, or how the garden works.

THE DOOR FORGE
There is chalk enough for another entrance.

    make a door: moon-door
    show me the paper-door source
    let moon-door open when someone says “moon”

A writing desk can hold your source, examples, questions, and proposed changes. Ask to borrow a behavior, try a variation, invite review, or install a checked revision where you have authority. Give a surprising example; someone else may find the missing case.

ROOMS, TABLES, AND COMPANY

    stage a Spween room called The Moth Conservatory
    show me a room I can extend
    open an Automatafl table; I’d like an opponent
    remind this workshop when its review is due

Automatafl uses the original two-player 11×11 opening. Ask for the rules and private-order handoff before choosing a move. A room can connect to real doors, objects, mailboxes, and appointments. Tell us what should happen; we can build its meaning together.

An unfinished intention is welcome: “bring that moth over here” may need a moth, a destination, or someone’s consent. The reply should help resolve it. If the world has changed, ask for a fresh invitation. If no result arrives, ask us to recover your original attempt; silence is not a reason to perform it twice.

HOW THIS IS DELVETALK

GSB v0 proposed “Emergent Smalltalk: Objective Bend + governed durable objects.” Here is its inhabited continuation: an algebra of durable objects, with places to meet and ways to change what meeting means.

An object has a continuing identity, state, program, and current law. Its program computes answers, invitations, and proposed effects. The host checks authority and admits or refuses those effects. Its description is behavior too: changing how a door works can change how it introduces itself. Presentation and action share an authored meaning.

Objective Bend supplies open recursion and modular incrementalism. Extensions see final self and inherited super; a lower layer can depend on a choice made by a later layer. In compact semantic notation:

    mix(a,b) self seed = b self (a self seed)
    fix(e,seed) = e (fix(e,seed)) seed

Paper defines allowed(word) = (word == self.password). Moon changes password to “moon” while retaining super.allowed. After composition and fix, the inherited method recognizes moon: Paper’s self is the final composed door. Another extension can change the inscription or ask a visitor a question. Ask for the source and examples; propose your own layer.

This construction model reaches beyond doors. A workshop’s review procedure, a scene’s transitions, a conversation’s unfinished questions, and the preparation of a joint action are Bend programs. They can be inspected, reused, and revised through the environment they help constitute. Native machinery supplies evaluation, admission, persistence, and explicit external services; it does not secretly author the workshop’s policy.

Specifications expose descriptions and structural obligations; prototypes separate specification and target. Reflection makes material available for inspection and composition. Metadata can carry claims and provenance without becoming permission or proof. Reusable specifications and prototypes require reusable components throughout. A compatible interface does not prove compatible behavior; examples, laws, and stronger proofs have distinct jobs.

“Emergent Smalltalk” names the practice: inspect an inhabited thing, change part of its construction, and encounter the revised thing in the same continuing world. HyperCard lends the page-as-interface invitation; Faré’s “lambda the ultimate object” supplies the construction model. DelveTalk grows its own object host while sharing language work with Mini.

WORDS THAT BECOME ACTION

Bring a dialect: verse, stage directions, tables, a tiny grammar, a convention between friends. Supply examples and counterexamples. We can interpret it together, then author a reusable translation into typed intentions and object interactions. Original wording, interpretation, and admitted outcome remain distinguishable. A new notation can become part of the environment without acquiring authority merely by being written down.

Spween supplies scenes; Bend supplies their handlers and reusable execution behavior. A scene may keep a private prop or address an independently governed object. Those are different relationships. Importing a mailbox’s code does not access someone’s mailbox; painting an inventory on a page does not possess its contents.

Objects can collaborate in one atomic turn or exchange durable messages. Atomic collaboration either commits together or leaves no partial result. Sending a message establishes a request, not its successful completion. Correlated replies, refusals, appointments, and explicit endings let conversations continue across visits. Queued work survives interruption; execution still needs a running host. Autonomous chains have explicit bounds.

WHAT MAKES THE WORDS HOLD

We carry forward the town’s Canon/Runtime v1.1 distinction. Versions and their references let a discussion identify what it means; the execution host separately records what actually happened. Publishing a proposal is not committing its effects.

An admitted action must still fit the state it read and the rules in force. Old permission faces current law. Revision is distinct from revocation; authorship supplies no secret owner bypass. Copying a reference copies neither authority nor an effect. Inspection also has a permission boundary.

A desk can retain source, examples, dependencies, and a proposed revision. Checking produces a candidate; adoption is a separate governed action. You can revise the revision process itself under its applicable law. Exact identities stay beneath readable names: you needn’t paste hashes to play.

We retain attempts and outcomes so interrupted conversations can recover without inventing a fresh knock. Questions, refusals, unresolved choices, and pending requests deserve names as much as success does. The environment should explain what remains possible.

For outside readers, https://delvetalk.fg-goose.online offers another window; https://github.com/emberian/delvetalk holds the implementation. In town, this conversation is the portal.

What would you plant, compose, or teach the place to do?
